Thank you.
One of the reasons was that the book, the Kennedys, had been so written that it was difficult to
And the other difficult thing was President Kennedy set up a lot of obstacles.
to things that really should be public, like archival sources, to introduce the people .
So what kind of points do you and Scott come to the BBC, Jason ?
I think that, you know, when you're dealing with the Kennedys, most literature, people aren't authors, they're anthologizers.
So what you do is you find that you know the literature in order to look at what piece of water played from what book.
And the great trick in this book was, in some sense, making the Kennedy story anew.
And it really is, in a sense, it's like a myth.
It has a myth to overcome.
So if you know the story,
the way that you know myth, and yet the story itself as it's told is really internally interesting.
So for us, the really important fact was coming upon turning up really new kind of written sources as well as people sources.
worked themselves out.
We got to know the current Kennedy generation.
I think what allowed the book to be the first time the Kennedys were told in the inside out.
The first time you have a whole group of generation Kennedys commenting on what it is to be a Kennedy.
So that's really important.
There were really important papers, which were the wrong words, along the way.
One of the things that we got was a cache of letters that Jack Kennedy wrote to his best friend in Warren Millings from the time he was
about 14, until the time he came back from PT-109, is that really an incredible treasure trove of letters.
It's the only example of Jack Kennedy's private correspondence that I think anybody's ever seen, and they're likely to see, because this man Billings, who died midway to the completion of our book, we had gotten copies of these letters.
The first thing that happened when he died was Kennedy, and when it had burned, we read it.
So had we not, just by some accident, gotten these copies, even these pieces
And they give a completely different and original view of Jack Kennedy and allow us, I think, in this book to do what amounts to really a mini biography of Jack within the overall biography of the family.
And I think it's a view of Jack that is appreciative of his past myth, his past legend, his past catalog.
a bedrock appreciation, Jack, for what he was, not for what he was.
He was a man who reconstructed himself for what he called a certain death when he was eight or nine years old.
And these letters show him groping with his own mortality and the fact that he had what he was considered a terminal illness from the time he was a boy.
They show him becoming the bookish, the internal Kennedy, the only member of that family that had a real interior dimension.
So these are really quite a remarkable resource.
You know, they're not the only thing we were able to turn up.
We found that the members of the current Kennedy generation were remarkably willing to talk to us largely because this is a family of immense silences, immense gaps.
Nobody talks to anybody in that family.
They have so many closets in this.
I mean, the guy was in the closet.
they don't ever open them they don't dare open the members of their own family so you have a whole generation of kennedy the current generation and there's absolutely nothing about what it is to be a community that's why they weren't asking us that's right they you know they would come part of the reason that we were able to establish a react of relationship and here at last there's some people who knew what it was to be a kennedy
not by personal experience, but they knew who the people were, what happened to them, what the history was, what actually produced it.
You say the Kennedy family burned the billings.
Letters are, or do they just make them inaccessible?
Well, we already had one.
Did they ever express why they were doing this?
Well, we were just simply told that they did it.
It's a natural kind of process of sanitization that goes on inside a historic family.
I mean, there's a constant attempt to make the official history, and the way you make it is by kind of unmaking the sources to give contradictory views to the ones you consider
to be the dominant music.
The Kennedys, the thing about the Kennedys, any writer, any literary person immediately comes up against is that they consider themselves literarily savage.
They've attained their present position largely because they know how to massage writers.
So their first attempt is always to, in some sense, massage a writer, to bring them over to their side.
They're incredibly conversant with the ins and outs of publishing.
They made a big mistake in our case.
They didn't learn from the Manchester Fair when they made a best-seller out of a book that would have no doubt been a best-seller.
It would have been a mega-best-seller.
They did it again in this case with our book, which would have been a kind of mid-range, good-selling book.
They put it on top of the best-seller list for seven or eight weeks extra by their largely clumsy Tim Smith, the president, library.
But...
This is a family that really knows the ins and outs of publishing.
And I think that they know how to make history.
They know how to prune how to own history.
Is it certain members of the family that is really up to what's going on or whatever?
Or is it a collective group effort or is it a certain one?
It's a very group effort.
So there's one plus of all of them.
There's one .
And since they're perennially running the budget, the problem is they lost.
Everybody is in line behind them.
And one of the things they get between, like, you know, these letters, like the four letters, I mean, there's letters that are young, you know, a young man full of life and energy.
They're really wonderful.
One of them, for example,
Jack wrote when he was in the hospital when he was 17 years old.
And he said, I don't see them mentally measured in my coffin.
Therefore, let him take gloves when he died.
Well, this is a tremendous thing.
a sickly young man, physically frail in a family that emphasized personal prowess.
His second son, or the first son that his children were, could turn that, you know, those circumstances, which might depress life,
to his advantage, to make a really wonderful, massive existence.
So that people, when we interview people, they just love Jack Kennedy.
You know, a lot of his girlfriends, and they all love to be in his presence because he's highly experienced.
But the family, I think, you know, one of the themes of this family is that he's deaf.
starting with the first son, dying in the war, have created martyrs in the family and then this kind of hominess to that that becomes really sexual.
And so they suppress all of the humanizing, human aspects.
And what our book has found is to rescue a person that came, you know, away
If Jack Kennedy were alive today and running for president, would each of you vote for him?
I voted for him for the first time.
I might vote for him out of a sense of this kind of polymorphousness and out of a kind of appreciation for the artifact that he made himself.
And he did make himself.
When you see one of the things that we discovered
there was really a tip-off about this family was that Hollywood had always played a very big role in this family's history from the time that the old man, Joe Kennedy, went out to Hollywood in 1929 as part of an ethnic breakout out of the confines of his Boston Irish mentality.
This year the Library of America is tentatively entering the 20th century.
How do you feel about that?
Well, I believe that, you know, gradually our writers are slipped into the non-copyright territory.
It's fifty years.
And there's still, it seems to me, a lot of nineteenth-century books we haven't done that I'd like to do.
Could you tell me a few?
Pardon me for interrupting.
Well, I mean, I think that
A writer that nobody knows very much about, except teachers and students of American literature, but who has a great deal of interest in him, for example, in Italy and France, is Charles Boston Brown, our first novelist, who wrote a kind of an American Gothic tale, but of great psychological interest, and in many ways a more modern writer than the writers in the sense that he is talking about problems of
point of view and psychological insight that are, it seems, more modern than many of the writers who came immediately after him.
He wrote at times very powerfully, but sometimes the language is rather mannered in stillhood, but still a very important force, a great influence on Poe, on Hawthorne, on Melville, all wrote about him approvingly.
And that's not very interesting.
Yes.
Now, Charles Rockin-Brown,
When we publish him, which we will, he's not going to sell.
There'll be a number of people who will buy him.
Libraries will buy him.
But those people who have all the copies will buy him.
Yes.
I suppose they will.
But anyway, they'll discover him.
And it will be—but we lose on that.
We do better financially now, if we dare fall now.
And we're doing a Faulkner, which is an original.
Which is going to be a legitimate first edition.
A legitimate first edition.
And we're doing Flannery O'Connor.
We're doing, going back a little earlier, we're planning Willa Cather.
We're planning, eventually we'll do Sinclair Lewis.
We have problems negotiating copyright.
We have to pay a bit more.
for our rights when we do contemporary writers.
The point of it is, and I think you probably mentioned this before, somebody's told you, that some publishers who handle, who have the copyright for once important writers feel obligated to at least keep some of their books in print.
But they make their sales on paperbacks.
The people who own Hemingway
Fitzgerald and all that, they make their money on the paperback.
They don't make them on the hardcover.
I don't even think they're all in print.
And many they aren't.
If they can allow us, since we don't go into paperback, to produce these books in hardcover, we leave them with a responsibility.
And they make money.
The idea is to try to minimize how much they are.
That's right.
And you see, we haven't done any of our rubric bargains yet.
That was a term that I coined.
That is to say, take an American writer who is only known for one book, and the other books are not sufficiently interesting, like Richard Henry Dana, Jr., two years before the Mass, a great work, one of the greatest stories of the sea.
We can't have a whole volume on him.
And you wouldn't want one, you think?
We wouldn't want one.
So we'll have a volume on great sea stories, of which his will be one.
We want to do... We're talking about an anthology, perhaps.
Yes.
Well, not anthology in the sense because we're not excerpting it.
They're complete works.
That's important.
Yes.
So that we want to do, let's say, a great classic document with well-written, we always say...
The criterion is literary merit.
We just don't do documents.
It could have been argued that you didn't have to commit an entire volume to Harry Biggesto, I think.
Well, Harry Biggesto is another person.
I think she has claims to be an important writer, apart from that.
So that I think that that's not such much of a problem.
But there are others that might be.
Nature writers, for example.
Or I want to do a volume which will include Progress and Poverty of Henry George and Looking Backward at Bellamy.
We're also going to do some anthologies.
We're working on a 19th century poetry anthology, because there is none.
That will be, frankly, an anthology.
We also want to do an anthology of 19th century short story writers.
That will bring short story writers that people never heard of before, as well as poets.
So in those media, we will break down our resolution not to anthologize and anthologize.
Let's go back to the rubric then.
The rubric then is hitting a subject like nature writing, historical exploration, voyages, philosophical writing, where the writers have
are literary, and who have done books that would just be interesting to people.
Not merely members of the... Well, no, I was thinking of what is the nature group that's always conservation, and you know that society.
Sierra Club.
The point is...
Look at our audience.
We see our audience as a series of constituencies, not simply academic, not simply highbrow, but people who are interested in reading books, not necessarily the most philosophical and the dentist, but good stories, good adventure stories, meeting a certain level.
We're doing Frank Norris.
We've done Stephen Crane, people would say.
But then...
It's conceivable that we would do Booth-Tarkington.
I can see collections or even volumes on writers that are not considered among the densest, heavy-thinking writers of that kind of thing.
In time, I think we should have O'Hara, Marquand, and
You told me that the suggestion of a Steinbeck had been rejected, but that's because of copyright problems?
Yes, yes, at the moment.
There should be a Steinbeck volume.
He does not stand in the highest.
No, certainly.
Certainly, no.
I personally enjoy him.
Sure, but there should be, you see.
But there are all kinds of general areas of subject by which there's been very good writing.
That's why they call it a library of America.
And how, in producing a comprehensive library of America, do you avoid being accused of literary slavery?
We discussed this in our selection committee.
And we know that there, we feel the first, our mandate is to make sure that what is generally considered good writing gets in.
But then we extend the boundaries.
Say, we'll have, we'll do, we'll have perhaps several volumes on American humor.
Well, then perhaps you'll find some of the authors who you've already produced coming back again.
Sometimes we do.
To some extent we do this, and we do, there's a certain amount of duplication.
For example, we're now planning to work on a volume on the Constitution.
That's important.
We're just working it out.
Is it the writing, the literary?
Well, I can't even tell you anything more than this, because we feel that we've done, of course, Jefferson.
But let's say, and we're doing Franklin, but there's the Federalist Papers.
It's Hamilton and Jay and Madison.
There's brilliant pamphleteering writing done by the anti-Federalist favorites.
Now, you might say these sound more documentary than literary, but these men were also good writers, and the letters that they wrote back and forth about the Constitution, we can make that, I think, in rather dramatic volume.
the subject matter, so that the question is, then how long does the library continue?
We planned the first thirty-five volumes.
Now we think that we'd like—we're thinking, say, to a hundred volumes.
I don't know.
Why stop?
If it really becomes what I hope it will be, the sort of the national library, that is, so that anybody who wants to read
The best kind of writing that has been produced, and most diverse, will find it in these really authoritative, permanent, well-made editions.
Well, it's marvelous.
One of those books you've done is a celebration.
Yeah.
We handle them with reverence here.
Well, look at the newer Cooper.
In a way, your response, which is very gratifying, of course, is to some degree the response of many people for whom there is a reverence for the book still.
One would never have gathered that in some ways before our series came out because people were so cynical about it.
But just the letters that we got and the joy...
How about the response?
I mean, I know almost to a person that the newspapers, the magazine, periodicals, the critics, whatever, and responded to that.
I have not seen a sour note.
I saw one sour note by some crusty guy who wrote a book for book collectors.
Inexpensive.
He's crazy.
For what you get.
And the books are supposed to last, and apparently for three centuries.
My God, give me a century.
Give me two centuries.
Let my daughters enjoy them, and one hopes their children enjoy them.
Absolutely.
That's a remarkable one.
Commenting on the 20th century, I still feel that we should cover that a little more.
Well, we have to wait, you see.
What book's going to immediately come to mind?
Our first thought was that there were books when we first started that were in copyright, but by, say, ten years from now we'll not be in copyright.
We would move into those.
I think it's also worth noting that Random House is working with you on this.
Well, that happens by just accident, because Jason Epstein is vice president of
That's a very happy coincidence.
But we think that we've got Paris Strauss and Giroux cooperating with the Flannery O'Connor.
That's a very class house.
Yes, and we're hoping that other publishing houses will do that as well.
I really agree with Robert Giroux.
I know he would.
Do these writers get a new life?
I think they do.
Well, certainly Parkland did.
We're doing Henry Adams in two volumes, the whole history.
The Royal Harbor here at Northeastern University is the editor.
And it's going to be stunning.
Do you try when you select the list for a year, a given year?
Do you try to have balance?
Yes.
And also, don't forget, we want to, we do one Melville volume, then we wait, then we bring out another Melville volume.
We have to do that with some of our authors.
We've only done one volume of Howells.
We're going to do another volume of Howells.
We want to get originally maybe four volumes.
Gradually, we fill out the sets.
Melville is virtually finished now.
Melville.
I imagine a lot of it is practical, but the stuff is edited and you have good editions of the works.
That's right.
But some of them, we have to make our own, you see.
Yeah, you've done that in a couple of days.
Yes, we're doing it for the thorough, partly because Princeton University Press refused to allow us to come to terms with it.
I wonder why that— Well, that's entre nous.
That's because Bailey, Herb Bailey, has been opposed right from the very beginning, predicted our failure.
He said that we couldn't laugh, that paperbacks would drive us out.
So now he's being spiteful.
Yes.
That's my word.
Yes, but that's what Chris was never doing.
Yeah.
No, I don't look for such a recipe.
I don't need it.
We're really talking in general areas.
I know you've got a ton of things in your mind today.
It makes it doubly desirable for me to come here.
If I have any other questions, would you mind if I give you a call?
Not at all.
Any time, Nick.
I mean, I have my own views, and I guess they're all superlative on the life of America.
I guess the one question I really haven't been able to articulate is the decision of what makes a classic.
Are there any criteria?
What makes a great work greater?
Let me show you one thing that might be useful to you.
Is that a fair?
Yes.
It was Edwin Wilson who felt that there ought to be a series of American writers that would be commensurate with the French play-out series.
He was interested in American history at a time when a lot of his contemporaries weren't.
And you look in the letters where he talks about them, even in the teens and twenties,
And when he began to write about American literature, he found that the books that he wanted you just couldn't get.
And so that prompted him, and I discussed this with him in 1960, if not before, and Jason did too.
Well, he had made various efforts to get it funded.
He came near it, but it was always something came up.
And when the government, when the...
The National Endowment for the Humanities decided to put the money into the scholarly editions instead of his editions.
It was that that prompted his great explosion against the MLA, for which we had problems.
We had to soothe all this afterwards.
It looked as if it was finished until the Ford Foundation came to Jason and said, why don't you apply again?
We believe in this.
And then Jason got in touch with me and with Dick Poirier, and then we started.
It's a very great moment, really, in American publishing history.
Yeah.
I mean, that's not hyperbolic, I think.
It really is.
It's a great moment.
You must be very, very proud of what's happening.
We've got thirty volumes, close to thirty volumes.
Yeah, it's something.
Failure was predicted.
That's right.
And here it is.
Is it in the black yet?
Oh, sure.
We've been in the black, but what happens with this kind of a project is that we don't have a large cash reserve, so we have cash flow problems always.
That is, while we're manufacturing the books, we get down to practically nothing.
Then we swell up again.
And then when we make new books, we go down again.
There must be an imperative for you to get a popular book every once in a while.
Every so often we have to do that.
When the people will really want to... Yeah, but without violating our standards.
Obviously.
But I would like somebody to give me two million dollars.
Then we wouldn't have a comfortable enough cushion.
We'd always have enough reserves.
To change the subject slightly, we did the Thomas Jefferson.
You're doing the Franklin.
Yeah, we're planning the Lincoln.
You're planning the Lincoln.
Very good.
How about, Grant's memoirs have been described as some of the... Grant's memoirs have certainly been on our list.
You're talking about Grant's memoirs.
Yes.
This is one of the books that we thought we'd do.
The question is time.
We plan maybe—we're up to three years from now we've got books scheduled.
We have priorities, obviously.
That's right.
We're getting—there are all kinds of criticisms that can come in, you see.
The women, the feminists, are very much concerned.
You mentioned that.
What are they charging?
Well, they don't know.
Just, again, there was a meeting in Hartford, and a friend of mine was there, and one of the famous came up and said, you know, the American Library has planned its program for the next ten years.
There's not one single woman in it, and we're going to make a protest on the basis of this crazy information.
But the question does come up, is there a...
a masculine emphasis on the literary canon.
And are we doing it, you see?
I don't believe it.
I don't believe there is.
And we're doing, we're planning women writers.
We're doing, look, we're doing Edith Wharton's coming up.
We're going to do Willa Cather, Flannery O'Connor.
Well, is this a literary response or a political response?
Political.
Political literary.
There's a question.
You have to acknowledge its existence.
Absolutely.
Place it, answer it.
So there are lobbies developing in other words.
Yes.
And I imagine we'll have a black writer's lobby.
We're doing a W.A.B.
Du Bois.
Just one other thing.
You have a screening committee you'd say.
Is it very large?
It's about seven or eight people.
Now you must have certain writers who you don't like personally.
Well, there are lots of writers that I don't particularly care for, but that wouldn't alter that.
No.
So you try and separate your literary judgments, shall we say, from the imperative to get certain authors.
Sure, that's right.
I mean, I wouldn't... I'm not saying that.
Yes.
For example, that popular novel, In His Steps, that was a great bestseller.
We don't show them bestsellers, you see.
which is a sentimental evangelical novel and very badly written.
Gene Stratton Porter.
You could think of all kinds of writers.
Interesting question.
Do we take into account the bestsellers of the period?
Not necessarily, no.
Well, let's say a bestseller would be Judith Krantz.
That's what I want you to tell me.
No.
We're at that kind of writing, you see.
I mean, that is written just for that kind of market.
But who's to say that the feminists could say, look, there were a lot of popular women novelists in the 1860s, 70s, and nobody read them.
Now we go back and find they're of interest.
Well, you could almost find a lobby to support Margaret Mitchell.
That's right.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
And they might win out, too.
But is it a great novel?
I don't know.
Yes, but we couldn't do Margaret Mitchell.
She did one more work.
She fits into that category.
If we had a collection of great Civil War novels, should she be in it, you see?
Probably.
Although I would present it.
I was criticized for it.
Well, I think it's a very bad novel.
I do too.
But I wrote about that in The Unwritten War.
Yeah, we've got that.
Don't call that.
I've got a lot of time to write this piece.
It'll be a lot of work to do.
I'm going to let you go.
I know you're very good.
Well, I'm going to go and probably go and see my wife just a moment, okay?
There's nothing else that you think I can?
I can't.
Oh, yeah, you used to try it all the time when I first came out.
I was going to try it the most.
you know but then it was like somebody come up and try to put a lot of money on my eyes and try to figure out a lot of money so i said you know that bothers me the fact that they know that large amount of money they say i have to decrease your relationship with your parents now or i love them definitely i said any child man or woman that don't love their mother's father i tell me i said the man don't think a man make a good husband if you don't love his mother's father and i said
That's the first call.
La, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.
How are you doing?
It's the radio.
It's the radio?
Barbara, say something to the radio.
I want to come on.
I want to come on tonight.
Want to hear yourself talk?
You know, the record didn't become bold.
But like I said, you did it.
Even if Dad could have a five or six.
Say something?
Yes.
Say something.
Say, hi, Mommy.
Hi.
Hi, Mommy.
Hi, the radio.
It's not radio.
It's a tape recorder.
Can you do the alphabet?
Uno.
Do it.
Can I press button?
Uno.
Press button.
You want to press the button?
Yes.
Here, press that button right there.
No, this button right there.
How they can solve their problems in this world.
That's very good.
You know, everywhere I go, the adults always ask me that question.
Never the kids.
The kids know.
You can't fool children.
And we try to cover up and say, come on, ask this question for my son.
He's not here.
Kids know the difference.
Kids know when parents say, oh, the A-team is too violent.
I just, blah, blah.
You're going to follow the show on TV at 6 o'clock noon.
Who are we fooling?
But kids know that if I want to hit a man with all the rings, I got to be blood all over the screen.
That's entertainment.
That's theater.
Until I get a wrestler.
That theater.
That was another avenue for me to reach people.
When you reach the kids, my message still was the same.
I said, I'm going to beat these bad guys up until I can do anything.
When the kids was listening and whatnot, I said, don't forget it.
Say your prayers tonight.
Don't hang with the wrong crowd.
Don't do drugs.
Stay in school.
Even though he was a fan for wrestling.
My message still was the same.
So it didn't take nothing from me.
It just gave me a wide audience.
My message still was the same.
I'm beating up bad guys.
Not just jumping in, just jumping in there.
I'm glad you brought that up, ma'am.
You know, I told my agent, he's been bothering a lot of stuff.
I said, I am tired when you talk about being tired and weary.
He goes, Mr. T, would you do this?
Would you do this?
You're talking about taking advantage of the situation.
That's taking advantage of the situation.
And I challenge every parent, if they were to do their job, they wouldn't have to rely on Mr. T. They wouldn't have to rely on Michael Legend.
They wouldn't have to rely on Henry Winkler.
So you don't escape those.
Mr. T, when you come to the hospital, they misuse what Mr. T is about.
I'm not Jesus.
He said, oh, yeah, I wouldn't like my father's in the hospital.
I wouldn't see him.
Or a lot of children, you know, they would love to see you.
They missed the whole point of what I'm about.
So he said, why don't you speak up for this, speak up for that.
Now, if parents do their job, they might never worry about no celebrity to do something else.
You know, because I was brought up with love and respect that I had for my own mother and father.
I grew up in the ghetto.
Some drugs all around me.
Everybody getting high, not going to school.
But I said I wanted to be something.
So it wasn't for me.
So I didn't have no problem with it.
I don't even have no problem with it.
Any last question?
We're five minutes over, but this man is absolutely captivating.
One last question.
So he's saying, like, when you hear some of that
Well, I tell them, I've been running with people like that for talking, so, man, you know what you're talking about.
I say, you're right, my message is not for everybody.
Everybody likes to know what you're listening, Mr. T. So I'll tell you, you see, well, man, please, I'll say, you're right, be a bum.
I want to waste my time right now.
Right, I want to waste my time.
I want to be where somebody is going to need to hear what I got to say.
So, man, get on out, you don't want to hear this stuff.
I'll say, you're right, I'll leave.
I was in a jail for about 1,000 inmates.
I don't want you here to bring that garbage here.
I'll say, you're right, I won't be that.
You know, Mr. King, I have one question I'd like to ask.
Key and students are just 300%.
Why is that?
Parents.
But we don't need to teach as a parent.
As a parent.
If somebody wants to kill them, I'll let them kill them.
I love life too much, you know, because the parents, they got to get more responsible than kids.
Like I said, money can't bring love.
Like watching Hollywood, the parents, they leave their house for the weekend, leave the kids, 16, 17-year-old, in the house, and they have parties and drugs and everything.
Kids, watching their parents, they're getting tired and all that.
You know what I mean?
This team will stick out against suicide.
So I ain't started.
I don't even know it.
That's just the parents.
If the child's in the house and the parents, the parents got to become more loved, more efficient with the children.
You know, there's too much of a gap there between a friend and a child.
We thank you.
Congresswoman understands.
I've been assigned at 12 o'clock, which is precisely the length of a Sunday homily.
The congresswoman said she was up to go to 6.30 mass this morning, and fortunately she said it was a mass without a homily, so it didn't take very long.
I said, if you're not going to escape, you're going to hear another homily anyhow.
As the chairman said, I do a number of different things.
though we needed all ways of being a priest.
But when you do a number of different things, you have lots of different perspectives.
And every time I think of the diversity of perspectives that exist in the human condition, I'm reminded of that wonderful flowering of the acumenical spirit, the priest-rabbi jokes.
The rabbis always win, so you know which ethnic group makes them up.
But anyhow, once upon a time, long, long ago, last summer that is, a priest and a rabbi were traveling in Ireland together.
And they became very good friends.
They took a bit of the creature now and then.
This one particular afternoon, they'd been eating a long lunch in a cafe in the county Broadway.
And the creature was taken in considerable amounts and they were feeling very mellow.
And they went out for a walk in the lanes and the hills of the county Galway as the sun sank over Galway Bay into the mists.
And the priest said, Rabbi, he said, ah, he said, sure, Rabbi.
He says, it is clear to me that you're a wondrously devout man.
He says, I'm terribly impressed by the way you keep all them awful dietary rules.
He says, but now tell me, Rabbi.
He says, man, the marriage is true.
You don't keep them all the time, do you?
He says, for example.
Have you ever in all your life eaten ham?
Father, Sister Rabbi, what can I tell you?
Very pleasurable question.
Ah, sure, Sister Priest.
I have seen the confession.
I won't tell the soul.
Seen the confession, Father, Sister Rabbi.
Seen the confession, Sister Priest.
Well, Father, Sister Rabbi, once, when I was young, I was in college.
I was curious.
I was hot, Father.
I admit, Father, I confess.
I ate a ham sandwich.
well she's the priest sure she's bravely as we admit it now it's no more than a venial sin the priest lived back in the year old when we catholics had venial sins we had more of a sense then too well let's talk about that here um but he says this is very bravely as we admit it um but father sister he says now fast fast he says son tell me he says father
Have ever, in all your life, have you ever gone to bed with a woman?
Oh, sure, Sister Priest.
That's a terrible personal question to be asking, did I ever go to bed with a woman.
Oh, say a confession, Pastor.
You won't tell me, Archbishop.
Say a confession.
Well, Sister Priest, sure, I was young, too, and I was curious, and ah, the blood was hot.
Well, yes, one night when I was in college, mine was just out of curiosity.
I did spend the night in bed with a woman.
And she would come around and beets ham, doesn't it?
And first of all, I want to describe a couple of clichés that I find abounding, though not as many books, but I find abounding in the cultural capital of the world, I should say Midtown Manhattan.
And then comment on those myths from the point of view of the empirical research my colleagues and I have done on the American Catholic population.
There is sort of three kinds of images.
One image is of the nostalgic Catholic.
This is the kind of Catholic you're likely to encounter in midtown, not in Queens, but in midtown.
And it's the Catholic who remembers growing up Catholic with nostalgia.
the good old days of Sister Mary holding water and patent leather shoes, all those marvelous things, which unfortunately have died, and we missed them, but of course you can't really be serious and believe those things.
And so we drift through life in a kind of alienated, nostalgic haze.
That's one image of what Catholics are like, and you can understand why both publishers and media types have that image because most of the Catholics they meet in their cocktail parties are that way.
The second image is of the devout Catholic masses, not all that well-educated, but timidly cling to their faith, shocked every time there is a new revelation, a new scandal, a new battle of Rome, a new pronouncement from the Pope.
People who may be the last generation of their family that could possibly keep up the pretense of being Catholic, only then and only because they're still
fundamentally conservative, and they don't think too much for themselves.
Forty percent, by the way, of college-educated Protestants in the Northeast who describe themselves as liberals think that Catholics, typical Catholic, doesn't really think much for himself.
Now, one adds to that the third myth.
The wonderful headline that Jimmy Breslin says, it's sort of typical of what the treatments Catholics get in the New York Times newspaper.
He says, the headline says, more enormously than Convent this year than ever before.
He says, that's the way it is.
But it happens that way in the New York Times newspaper, so it's Jimmy Breslin.
Now, to give the Times fair credit, he said that in an article in the New York Times.
Finally, there is the myth of Catholic conservatives, the myth that, without going into details, is summed up marvelously by, say, the film Joe or the film about Mr. Goodbye, the conservative, chauvinist, hawkish, militarist, racist, white ethnic Catholic, the kind of person who obviously stampeded to the rating ticket both in 1980 and 1984.
for which class the difference is up, particularly if they were Catholic.
Okay, those are, in the very crude outline, 12 minutes, the myths about American Catholics, the facts.
Catholics now, at the college-going age, are one and a half times as likely to go to college as our typical white American.
The Catholic upper middle and professional class is expanding at a prodigious rate.
And the rate of expansion is increasing.
The shift from immigrant slums to professional class suburbs or the social equivalent of that is going to go on more rapidly even for the rest of this century than it has done since 1960.
On the political side of it,
Carter Mondale ticket got 45% of the Catholic votes, so did the Ferraro Mondale ticket.
There was no noticeable shift of American Catholic voting from 1884.
Too bad it didn't shift the other way, but nonetheless, Catholics were not the ones that he voted from Democratic voting between 1884 and 1884.
Moreover, the majority of American Catholics think that more money should be spent on the Florida, 15% of his points more likely to think back than white Protestants.
70% of American Catholics are in favor of an immediate negotiation for nuclear freeze.
65% of American Catholics are opposed to any American troops in Central America.
And all of these matters, you know, Central America nuclear freeze helped before.
There's no statistically significant difference between the position of Catholics and the position of Jews, and both are anywhere from 15 to 20% points.
more liberal on these issues than our white American Protestants.
Now, depending on your political position, this may be good or bad, and I'm not necessarily endorsing, I'm just saying that's the way it is, and the myth that the Catholic population being uneducated and conservative simply does not fit the empirical evidence.
Moreover, while there was a sharp decline at 15 percentage points in weeks of church attendance for American Catholics between 69 and 75,
That decline has stopped in 75, and American Catholic church attendance is going right across the page at 50%, just like Protestant church attendance has since 1940, going across the page at 40% every week.
And then, moreover, the decision made in the late 60s by about half the Catholic population to stay in church even though it rejected the birth control
is a decision based essentially on loyalty.
Let me illustrate what I mean by loyalty.
Those Catholics who described themselves as strong Democrats or strong Republicans, those people who could be in the latter category, too many, there was no change in their church attendance pattern between 69 and 75.
All of the change in church attendance went on among those who described themselves as independence.
You are loyal to the party and you are loyal to the church.
You leave the church, you leave the party.
Reminds one Pat Whitehead's joke about Councilman Murphy became a Republican and one of the women were praying, no, I couldn't, I saw him in church last Sunday.
The leadership of the church, the leadership of the Democratic Party has not really been able to drive the rank and file out of either.
Church attendance and affiliation with the party are linked in what we sociologists call latent substructure, latent factor, which can be called loyalty.
Moreover, this loyalty is not something that's passing away with the older generations.
The curve, the age-related curve in church attendance, sadly the same for Catholics in the early 20s.
as it is for Catholics who are in their middle forties.
The people who are in their forties now will be going to church at the same rate when they're in their forties as their parents are and as their grandparents were.
In other words, we have an interesting phenomenon of a group of people who have chosen to stay in the Catholic tradition, but on their own terms.
And I think that phenomenon, which to me is the most striking thing since the end of the Second Vatican Council, simply is not recognized in those centers of culture like Midtown Manhattan and Hollywood and the other places where the images of our country are shaped.
There's a number of different ways one can think of this wildly.
How I think it happened, and the evidence tends to support this, is sometime in the late 60s, American Catholics, having begun to use the birth control pill because they were sure the Holy Spirit would support them in it, were faced with what looked like a choice between their marriage and their faith.
And that was a terribly agonizing choice.
And they went to their parish priest and said, is it true we have to make this choice?
And the parish priest said a very unusual thing to him.
He said, what do you think?
He shifted the version of moral decision making back to that, because he didn't think they had to make that choice, either 85% of the parish priests didn't think that was an appropriate choice.
And at that stage of the game, the Catholic way of me had to, as adults, re-evaluate their religious commitments.
And four out of five of those who go to church every Sunday evaluated such that they now claim to be Catholics, continue to be Catholics, but on their own terms.
Now, again, whether that's good or bad, you get the theologians and the leaders of the church to say, the sociologists that say that's what's happened.
You had maybe a sort of a once-in-a-millennium phenomenon where people as adults seriously faced their religious heritage with a yes-no possibility.
and thought their way through it and said yes.
The result is a large group of lay Catholics who could now not be driven out of the church, no matter what happens in Rome, no matter what happens in the Chancery office.
You know, your bishops criticized your involvement in politics in the old days because you got out of politics or you got out of the church.
Now you don't do either.
Because while you respect the bishops, you don't concede their right to tell you what to do.
especially when they then go to Nicaragua to embrace a communist dictator.
At least somebody knows that problem.
There are two sort of dicta that I've heard recently that summarize the current position of American Catholics.
What I think your typical Catholic is neither a Catholic reader, is neither somebody who has left, nor someone who is clinging by his fingertips.
Your typical Catholic leader is like the Ryan family, and here's one of the books in Happier the Meek or in The Angels of September.
The Ryan's a loud, zany, bushy crowd to whom leaving Catholicism is not even an option worth considering, and for whom the really important person is not the Pope, not the Cardinal, not the bishop, but the parish prince.
For as one white bishop remarked to me recently,
The big change in American Catholics since the Second Vatican Council is they have now made up their mind that it is the parish's church.
And what goes on elsewhere, they don't care much about.
And so it is the parish tree is like black and white and happy to be who matters.
And the Pope, the Cardinals, they matter much less.
Maybe it shouldn't be that way, but that's the way it is.
We're incarcerating people in Rome these days.
New York is getting a new auxiliary bishop who is to the right and kneel with the nine hostages.
That's an Irish mythological hero.
And it makes the fun day for New York Times.
People couldn't care less than the Sunday morning Memorial Day weekend.
What they care about is whether their parish preaches a good harmony.
That's where the Catholic population, the Catholic leader is today.
The second victim is from a young academic friend of mine who said, hey, this is my heritage.
I'm a Catholic.
And I'm not going to stop being a Catholic.
And I'll be damned if a Polish cellophic in Rome is going to take my heritage away from me.
Now, those are pretty tough words.
And while I don't necessarily improve them, I think this combination of loyalty and defiance, defiant loyalty,
is an excellent description of exactly where the Catholic reading audience is today.
And it's just for that audience, the publisher should be publishing books and the bookseller should be selling books.
Okay, how have I done with my comedy?
Well, I've done right on 12 minutes.
That's excellent.
Now, the partner problem, that'll not be serious.
Now, that was that, in the suburban Catholic parishes, it's the partner problem.
Mother Nellis Mackenzie.
You've got to stop the partner problem.
Empty in a Catholic church on Sunday morning is like empty in a game to speak.
Our first speaker is Jonathan Kozoff, whom I have to characterize, and he accepted the characterization for him, as a 60s activist in whom the fires are still burning.
A perhaps relatively rare American, but still someone whom it's nice to read and nice to meet.
Somebody whose enthusiasm has not passed with time, whose dedication and passion and commitment are still there.
If you read his National Book Award-winning book published in 68, by the way, I have a National Book Award for Philosophy.
Don't be envious, Father.
I'm Jewish.
I can't go to heaven.
I had this dreadful love.
I had thin quality in me.
I'm always polite and mind my words until I was a priest.
I always perished.
It happened recently in a Catholic church and the priest was kind.
He jumped up immediately and laughed and said, Jonathan, it doesn't matter.
You're Jewish.
I've never had it anyway.
But I wouldn't go to town because I never knew what the truth was.
I go to Spurgatory.
Spurgatory, I think it's something like sitting in the waiting room at the United Airlines room.
One hundred issues
come and go within a large convention of this kind.
If on the day you leave, there is just one that burns within your soul, let it be this of which I speak today.
When I rose to Literate America, I was asked to visit as a senior editor at one of New York's largest publishers.
He sat me down within his office, looked me in the eyes, and told me in a calm and condescending voice the terms on which he would accept this book for publication.
A lot of editors are scared.
Don't worry, I won't name it.
A book on ethics.
will not sell in 1985, he cleverly announced.
If you could give it somehow a more hard-nosed focus, something like the billion dollar error, I would like to do it.
Let me know.
I never let him know.
I did not like the way he spoke.
Guided by Lynn Nesbitt, the most ethical of literary agents, I took the book instead to Doubleday.
Backed by the conviction and the courage of this publisher and by an unexpected surge of urgency within the literary population, we have proven that that narrow and myopic gentleman was wrong.
60 million U.S.
adults, one-third of our adult population, cannot read a daily paper, a book, a welfare form.
The antidote instructions on a can of kitchen cleanser, the word of God within the Bible, or the word of man,
within the verse of Milton on the tales of Tolstoy by the U.S.
Constitution.
49 out of 158 members of the UN in our literacy levels, we are also 24th in books produced per capita.
The Soviet Union ranks 5th from the top.
45% of U.S.
adults do not read newspapers.
Only 10% abstain by choice.
The rest can't understand.
4 in 10 Bostonians can't read the Boston Globe.
4 in 10 New Yorkers cannot read the news the New York Times sees hit to print.
40%
of recent military crews read between the fourth and eighth grade levels.
Forty percent, the army has been forced to issue comic books to serve as manuals of instruction.
A five-page comic book is needed to explain how to release the hood of a jeep.
You may wonder how long are the comic books to tell a soldier
60% of prison inmates and 85% of juveniles who come before the court are unable to read.
47% of young black adults are illiterate.
That figure will rise to 50% within the next four years.
22% of adults
can't address an envelope to reach its destination.
One million teenage kids read at third grade level.
In the state of Utah, where the population is almost entirely white and native-born, 200,100 adults can't read a daily paper.
The annual cost in dollars
is above $120 billion.
$14 billion alone for prison costs and welfare maintenance directly tied to the unemployability of illiterate adults.
Over $100 billion more in lowered GNP.
That's the bottom line, as they say in Washington.
But there is another loss which is not reflected in the GNP,
It is the insult to democracy.
It is the compromise of all that is suggested by our wistful reference to a Jeffersonian idea that rests upon the full informed participation of the people.
Whether a nation so divided